We had actual World War II tactics where defensive
lines were established and tanks came. Much of our
operations, I think, was defend your own
backyard, defend your supply base, and patrol
out, even with long-range patrols, patrol to find
where the enemy is. And the difficulty in Vietnam,
as opposed to most of the wars that have been fought
by the U.S. conventional forces, is that we never
were able, in many instances, to find him, fix him,
and fight him. nowhere he is where we can fight him
in a conventional manner and destroy him. The
Vietnamese had a very good record in, I mean, I'm
talking about the NDA and the VC, of ambushing U.S.
forces,
inflicting serious casualties and
disappearance. They were very good at, by and
large, very good at disappearing. What did you
think of the fighting ability of the North
Vietnamese Army and the Viet Cong?
The Vietnamese Viet Cong and NVA?
More so the NVA, I believe, than the Viet Cong. were
highly respected by me and the South Vietnamese.
The South Vietnamese respected the NDA soldier as
a soldier and treated them with respect when
captured. The Viet Cong was considered a traitor,
a criminal, a hoodlum, and had almost no respect.
because they were traders.
But as far as their fighting ability, their
fighting ability was no different than that of the
United States. And as someone said, as I recall, in
1964, with his back against the wall, the South
Vietnamese soldiers is an outstanding fighter by
the same token. So was the NBA, so was the Vietcom.
The problem was, in all cases, getting their back
against the wall where we could get them to, where
we could find them and get them to fight. As you
know, our support, except during tremendously
bad weather, was always much, to our advantage,
overpowering. We had artillery, we had naval
gunfire in certain areas, and we had aviation,
whether it be helicopters or fixed-wing
fast-movers, fighter bombers, the Air Force and
Navy and Marine Corps fighter bombers.
We had the support that they could only dream of.
and be the recipients of loads of bombs, napalm
rockets, and automatic cannons. So if we could
find the VC or MDA, it was almost for sure an
automatic win. The nights only, and I'm talking
about the hours of darkness, and the hours of
overcast, bad weather, and so forth. Only those
periods of time normally belong to
the enemy. And mostly the, except for, as you
recalled earlier, the strategic hamlets, except
for the strategic hamlets, mostly we
outnumbered. And even our own internal support,
artillery and mortars, machine guns, heavy
machine guns, outweighed by many times over the
support and the firepower of either the NVA or the
Viet Cong.
What do you feel that the military learned from
Vietnam
I would say that there were several things, and I
would just name a couple. Number one, it is not
desirable to become embroiled in a guerrilla
warfare situation on the mainland of Asia,
that the
conventional forces, regardless of its support
cannot win a war, cannot successfully fight a war
without total commitment towards
the war. Regardless of the type of war to be engaged
in, that the military cannot succeed without
support from the civil populace of the United
States, nor can they win that same war without the
support of the civil populace of the country that
we're fighting in.
I would say that we learned some favorable things
from the war in Vietnam. We learned the
capabilities of aviation assets. We learned the
capabilities of our own troops. We learned the
capabilities of our weapons systems. And we
learned the weaknesses of our weapons systems. We
discovered in many cases that while helicopters
are great for moving troops, that they are very
vulnerable. in situations such as we had in
Vietnam, that they are vulnerable to small arms
fire, they're vulnerable to machine guns, and to
surface-to-air missiles. And while we paid for
that knowledge, I believe that technological
innovations to defend against those things are in
fact still being utilized and we're still
learning from the experiences in Vietnam.
While a great deal of the personal memory of
Vietnam is lost to the military now, I believe that
there is still a great
institutional memory of Vietnam, that the
lessons of Vietnam have been passed from trainer
to trainee, and the trainee subsequently becomes
a trainer and has not completely lost all the
knowledge that was gained, and the actual combat
experience has not all been lost. How did you try to
fight the war?
Primarily from day to day. I tried to, depending
upon what my individual job and mission might be,
to try to accomplish what I perceived my mission
might be. planned for the next day with the hope
that the next day would be there to let me carry out
what I had planned for that day.
It was not a situation that I planned, began in 1964
to plan to carry out what I did in 1971. It was a
situation that in each tour I had varying missions
that required me to do different things from time
to time and I relied on my own training to guide me in
what needed to be done and a sense of I suppose
empathy for my Vietnamese counterpart if I had
one, and empathy for the Vietnamese population,
understanding that I don't understand the
Vietnamese culture or any other colonial
culture. I have some empathy toward their desire
to be left alone, and whatever I can accomplish
leaving them alone to give them some help and
assistance towards being what they wanted. I
tried to accomplish that within my capabilities.
Did the seeming apathy among the peasants towards
any particular form of government or towards the
war in general, did that frustrate you at times?
that they seem not to want us to be there, or did they
ever seem not to want us to be there? They, to my
knowledge, I never witnessed an
incident where the Vietnamese populace was
anti-US or anti-government.
There were certain individuals that I observed
and I saw who were primarily anti-government
forces, anti-U.S. forces. But there were no, that
I recall, no overt demonstrations of Yankee go
home. To my knowledge, I don't I just don't recall
ever seeing any signs that said Yankee go home or
any of those things. I think that primarily the
only sign that I did see which said Yankee go home
was on the back of a U.S. Marine Corps armored
personnel carrier.
So even in 1971-72, the relations between the
military and the populace was still good? Do you
feel that? Uh-huh.
I didn't have any close friends in 71-72. The
Vietnamese had been some of the military.
But the Vietnamese, I had In 71-72, I had
Vietnamese people working for me as laborers,
secretaries, clerks, cooks, bartenders, that
type of thing. They worked for me, and they were all
very friendly. Of course, that may have been
employee-type relationships. I did not spend any
more time in the civilian community that I
absolutely had to because I had plenty to do
elsewhere. In other words, I didn't have that much
time that I could get my job done and then get out of
the division headquarters area and into town. I
just didn't go. Didn't spend any time. During the
68-69 era, we were frequently in our regular
combat patrols. We might wind up in a village and
stop and have a beer, cold drink, or a bowl of rice or
something of that nature, a bowl of soup maybe, and
talk to the local cafe or restaurant proprietor,
if you could call them a restaurant today. It was
whatever. And they seemed to be friendly then. The
merchants, the souvenir merchants around Marble
Mountain in 64 were reasonably friendly. And they
were reasonably friendly in 68 and 69. As a matter
of fact, I'm talking only about what was overt now.
I have no idea. These same people may have, as soon
as we left, gone and sent a message, gone or sent a
message to a local BC commander and told them where
we were, what we were doing, and what their
strength was. I have no idea about that.
But the very few occasions that I
was in the civilian community in 71 and 72. It was,
they were,
it seemed as if maybe we were treated as honored
visitors. Of course, we were spending money. And
that was, I guess that was what they were looking
for. I can't say that I was ever treated as poorly in
Vietnam as I've been treated in the United States.
What do you think of journalists? Did you ever have
a journalist go out with you on an operation? Oh,
yes. I had frequently saw journalists in our area.
is the higher the headquarters, the more
journalists we normally had. And some of the
journalists that I knew were pretty doggone good
soldiers. And some of the journalists that I knew
were nothing but cremadons. And on a few
occasions, they actually interfered with our
combat But I don't think highly of a journalist.
As you may know, I was reported on at least one
occasion in a national magazine to have been wiped
out. And I believe that was the 68-69 era, probably
sometime in the late summer of And I frequently saw
things in the news magazines and in Stars and
Stripes that I knew were to be false. But in most
cases, their
attitude was gathered, I believe, probably from
dealing with the
and in
my case, not checking their facts before they
started writing, basing their news reports on
less than accurate information.
How did you feel about, feel knowing that you were
leaving,
knowing you'd lost the war, or that the army, that
the war was lost, or did you, I mean? I don't believe
we really thought the war was lost. I thought that
the program called Vietnamization was working at
that time.
probably that most of us, and myself included,
thought that our last tour there was meant to
install backbone or grow backbone in the Army of
the Republic of Vietnam, South Harvard. I think
that we believe that we've been successful
because Now, you must realize that this was the
Delta, and that we were fighting the main force NVA
in the Delta, and we were up fighting them along
what in the area is called the Parrot's Beak. I've
never really known exactly why they call it the
Parrot's Beak. except maybe it's the section of
the border or maybe one of the rivers. It looks like
Parrot's Peak. I really don't know. It's adjacent
to Cambodia. And I think we believed that we were
winning the war. And I think that the incidents
that occurred about, I believe it was 1975, When
the North actually invaded in strength and rolled
up the army and finally made it into Saigon, wasn't
that January of 75? Yeah, but we'd already pulled
out, hadn't we? Most of our, we had pulled out,
before I left there, we had pulled out all of our to
the best of my knowledge, all of our ground combat
troops. And the primary thing that was remaining
was a little bit, maybe a few batteries of
artillery, and I think they had moved out. And all
we had left was what they call the air cavalry. and
that was primarily helicopter helicopters with a
few uh a few squads of infantry attached and it was
during most of my 1971-72 tour um it was a
vietnamese war at least in the delta there were no
u.s combat troops in the delta except for the air
cad and They were
winning, and I never thought that we lost the war.
When we're talking about the United States, the
United States, contrary to what I may have said
earlier, we didn't lose the war. We were prevented
from winning the war.
in effect lost the war by default. In other words,
we quit and moved out. And you cannot win a war when
you quit and move out. Now, I'll accept the fact
that the South won the war up to a point, and then
they lost it. If you want to keep score, they were
head on points up to and including January of 1973,
and maybe as late as March of 1973. As I recall, the
very last advisor came out of the 7th Division in
March of 1973, which was a little over three months
after I left there out of the 7th Army. So, and at
that time they were still, if you want to look at
body count, they were still winning. They were
killing more NBA and BC, primarily NBA, than they
were losing soldiers. So, I guess maybe they were
head on points as late as March of 1973, but
apparently,
And you'll have to remember, too, that the amount
of supplies being delivered to Vietnam was
seriously cut. The budget, the United States
budget for support of the South Vietnamese
military was severely cut
before the NBA came across the demilitarized zone
in force. So
the division commander had to cut back on the
amount of artillery he could use. The aviation
assets available had to cut back on the rockets and
machine gun ammunition. It was just a situation
where you to fight the way you have been taught to
fight over a period of years with almost unlimited
assets of ammunition and combat support. Now,
when it's no longer there, you don't know how to
employ your troops the way you used to. And you'll
have to remember also that this was one of the few
times that the NVA attacked in force and became,
I'm talking about the first time that I recall, was
the summer offensive of 1972.
Spring and summer offensive in 72, maybe just
after tail offensive in 72. where they came across
in force. And they were beaten to a standstill and
pushed back, wiped out. And this is the second time
that they've done it. The first time they had the
assistance of U.S. combat support, combat
service support, to deliver ammunition, replace
losses, and so forth. In 1975, that luxury was no
longer there.
They ran out of ammunition, they ran out of troops,
and there was nothing left to fight with. So I guess
if you can call that a win or a loss, it's whatever
you want to call it. So essentially, although they
were on the winning side in 1972-73,
when we left, when our support was... pulled from
them that it made the turning point towards the
end? Somewhere between those two dates when the
budgets were cut and our logistical prop was
removed, then they no longer had the ability to
fight as we had taught them to fight.
Thank you.